This is the serious good period, when you're, if you're me anyway, the time between the time that my book is last touched by you, I'm sorry, and before it comes out into the world and gets, commences its life and dependent on you is the most blissful time in the world.
Yeah.
Because I think for the first one, too, it probably, it's like your first anything maybe.
Mm-hmm.
No?
Oh, no, it's great now.
This time in your life?
Yeah.
No, I mean, this is my first book.
That's what I mean.
What I'm saying, though, is the first book always the best one, or do you find that everyone that comes out is still as ecstatic as the last one?
No, the first time you publish a book, your life feels charmed.
Your life feels charmed.
And there's no... I know.
Don't let anybody talk you out of it.
Don't let anybody say,
You know, you're acting like a kid in a candy store because, hell, it's your life.
You worked eight years on this book, and you were in it.
Enjoy it.
And this is pertinent to you because, and we are talking to Richard Floyd for the sake of the tape.
I could never have done this without the total support of my wife.
And it's really her idea.
This book, I was writing a piece nine years ago for Boston Magazine.
And I always read stuff to her.
Everything I write, I read to her.
Yeah, what you do, I understand.
You read to your wife.
I used to.
You don't anymore.
She's got into politics.
She doesn't have time.
I've spent a lot of time listening to her.
And she said, I was reading this thing.
It doesn't matter what it is.
And she said, you know, that's your book.
That's your book.
And it became the book.
And to lead.
And to support me when I said I've got to quit the newspaper job because I can't do these two things at the same time.
You can only give your best shot to one thing.
I don't know if you find that.
I do find that.
Maybe you find that in teaching, because I don't think you're teaching anymore.
I only taught two years, no.
But did you find that it drained?
It diverted you from what you were most... Fundamentally.
Fundamentally.
It doesn't seem like it when it's happening, because if you're teaching and you're really succeeding at it, it feels so good.
You think to yourself, well, this can't be bad.
But what it does here, it somehow lessens your tolerance for the kinds of
and I don't want to make it sound overly dramatic, but peculiar kinds of agonies that are involved in writing a book.
If you're being satisfied on some other level, it lessens your tolerance for the agonies of writing a book.
You need to write a book as well as you possibly can.
As far as I'm concerned, it requires complete application, because you have to generate your satisfactions beyond the particular grievances that the book creates.
teaching out there and making you happy and pleasing, teaching the students.
You're getting your satisfaction from someplace else.
This book, and we really won't talk that much about the novel.
That's my job, is to read it.
I'm at ease talking about... Not talking about the novel.
I mean, you'd rather not... I mean, I'm at ease not talking about it.
Okay, yeah, that was just... Yeah, my job is to read the... Yeah, it's not your job to tell me what you meant.
That's my job to figure it out, and I've enjoyed it enormously, but...
We will talk about a few peripheral things, and I just spent an hour on the radio talking to a guy about the book.
It just practically bored him in the ceiling.
Yeah, I mean, he's supposed to read it.
It would be anything.
Oh, yeah, that's great.
We're just talking about it, as you say.
Whatever I mean, some guy walked up to me in a bookstore yesterday.
I was there in a signing book, and the guy said to me, Ah, you write this book?
I said, yeah, I don't know.
I said, well, what's it about?
I said, it's about 451 pages here reading it.
It was a little bit rude to him, but everything I know about Independence Day, I put in it.
I can't do anything better than what I did.
At least somebody should allow you the courtesy of knowing what the book is about.
Give the person the respect for all the work and the energy and the love and passion that went into it to at least know
or at least have a decent team not to ask, you know what I'm saying?
Well, he meant, you know, it was just a throwaway line, a throwaway line, but unfortunately it was a throwaway line about my book to me, so I just put it in his hand, which was kind of an aggressive thing to do, because then I pinned him to the buyer's thing, because there, you know, he had to have my book in his hand, and he didn't want to buy it, and had to figure out something to say while I was sitting there to get himself off the hook, which actually, I'm sorry, seems quite excruciating to watch.
He had to stare at it as though it were an art object.
But there are a certain few things I want to ask you about.
I read all this.
Knopf, I have to say, sent out a terrific press kit on you.
I'll tell you, Knopf.
Knopf.
I like to see everything that's been done.
People say, I don't want to see what's been done.
I say, what a fool you are.
You should read everything that you can that's been done about a person.
I should know as much about you as I possibly can.
You got all the stuff from all my other publishers.
Yeah, and it's terrific, but the profiles are good.
I mean, I know what people have said about you often.
I don't know whether they're copying each other or you write about these desperate down-and-out characters in your early books.
Although I always think of them as people trying to make their life better, you know, it's kind of a half-time empty business.
I always see the glasses in full.
But certainly with the creation of this character and his appearance, again, this has to be a transitionary moment in your life, creatively, I think.
I've never imagined doing anything like that before, writing a sequel to a book I'd already written.
And so one of the things you are trying to do, as you will find out,
is to find, you know, you use up so much of your life writing books, you use up your history, you use up a certain number of brain cells.
It gets to be a bit of a challenge to find something new to do.
That isn't just new for novels, but a second novelty.
So to have written a sequel was something I never expected to do.
So it's satisfying in the sense that it's something I never imagined doing.
And even though it's a sequel and has something slightly to do with another book, to me it's still a whole new experience.
But why did you feel that you wanted to do the sequel?
Certainly, anyway you said it, he's still 44 years old, and it's in 1988.
Right.
Whereas it was just only five years later.
That's right.
Well, this isn't Rabbit Angstrom.
No.
Some people ask me, I don't know what they quite mean when they say, is this going to be another Rabbit Angstrom?
I always sort of scratch my head and say, well, I don't know.
I don't know why there needs to be another one.
No, this is...
I had the voice somehow still echoing around in my brain, and particularly in my notebook.
I am interested in the notebook.
We'll come back to that, okay, real quick.
But I found all these notes I was accumulating in Frank's voice, and I started trying them out on some of the things that I was interested in distinct from Frank, and I found that Frank actually, that voice that I call Frank, could
negotiate these new subjects, could talk about different things from what he had talked about in the sports writer.
So finally, after a year of kind of revisiting it, I just gave in.
I thought, well, this is a given.
You know, this is what the world has given me to write about.
And so I set off on it.
Very, in some ways, nervous about the idea of a sequel because sequels are sometimes boring to lose.
Sometimes they're just the first book written over again.
Sometimes you run out of stuff in the middle.
Sometimes you don't know why you're doing it anyway.
So I resisted it for a long time, talked myself out of writing the book, but the book kind of wouldn't go away.
It was what I had to write about.
And if I hadn't written about it, I think I would have felt like I was not taking my work at its time.
Because I wanted to write a big book.
a long book, a comprehensive book, as much about America as I could.
And this seemed to give me the opportunity.
Of course, the metaphor of independence is pretty obvious, too, isn't it?
Yeah.
It's about independence.
Right.
It takes place from the 4th of July.
Well, much more American than that.
Yeah, that's what I thought.
I mean, I wanted, you know, there's a great line of, of Dykes, you know, in an essay he wrote about William Dean Howells in which he said he wanted to write a,
novel good enough for america and that's what i wanted to do you know i'm thinking though you've done some uh screenplays this could work you know as a play as a play yeah don't you think so maybe uh you'd have to work on it obviously somebody else would have to work on it i'll tell you because this boy can go work on it no more not this not no no no um i don't want to i don't want to work on this book anymore this book just about broke my ass um
probably in the last year.
Why?
Because it's so long, and it's got, in a sense, it's got so many sentences in it.
It has to be more than length, though.
It has to be just more than the heft of it.
Well, it had some fairly, for me, devious and complicated arguments in it that I felt real responsibility to make sure I had clearly in the book a lot of, you know, a lot of looking at the front and looking at the back
not knowing how to, not knowing what to say to make sure that, you know, all of the novelty things, making things progress, making things consistent, making things hook up, making everything be part of a larger whole that is actually more important than some of its parts.
So that, for me, for the last year, I finished the book, I was in West Rock Street.
I, you know, I was teaching at Harvard.
I just, you know, it was 18 hours a day,
for not ten and a half months every day, including Christmas Day, Thanksgiving, and New Year's.
I just don't want to do that again.
I don't want to get into that.
I don't want to get into that book again.
Do you read your work when it's done?
I know you give readings.
I read the whole book aloud.
I read this book aloud twice this winter.
That was the completely ORS experience.
Do you find things that you'd like to change?
No.
I mean, as you're reading.
I mean, not even a couple of words.
No, no, not a one.
I wouldn't change a word.
And you believe that finished work is finished work.
You'd never go back and screw around with any of the earlier things that you've done.
No.
Do you read your previous work?
I don't read anything aloud past my book of stories.
Oh, no, I'm sorry.
I would read some parts of the sports writer aloud.
But there was a kind of, I made a kind of a, well, I don't want to call it a break.
But my life, my ambitions kind of altered after 1981.
I had a kind of a failure with the book, The Ultimate Good Luck, which failed in the thinking nobody read it.
And I think I thought back then that if I was going to write another book, I was going to have to muscle up in a way that I think I hadn't muscled up to there.
Okay, I did.
That was a failure in finding the audience, but did you consider the book a failure?
No, not at all.
Not at all.
I guess I had to, I thought I had to, my agent said to me when I was lost off into writing this voice letter, she said, you know, you'd better have a big book this time, she said, because you're going to run out of whatever, you know, in other words, what she said to me was, this better do something and get done.
You mean with her or with the publishing?
I think she just meant that I was going to get cast as somebody who couldn't find an audience.
So is there a
An ulterior drive for commercial success?
No, there is a quite profound drive to find an audience, which is quite distinct from commercial success.
They sometimes go hand in hand.
We certainly, with professional writers, we have to live.
But I've lived.
I've lived quite nicely making a living as a writer for the last 12 or so years and do not want, do not need a lot more money.
And I also have a conviction that that tide will turn on me and I'll come to a point where I won't.
Well, you know, I won't be able to write and publish books with some success forever.
I don't think.
I just don't think life goes that way.
Because I'll change.
What you're saying is fashion.
I think your work is a lot more important than being finished.
Everybody's work has a little bit of fashion involved.
I'm not tearing to it.
I'm just doing what I know how to do.
I mean, your good friend Ray Carver says, you're the late Ray Carver.
We're lying for lying.
He says, you're the best for a writer alive.
That's quite a humbling observation, isn't it?
He was a sweet man.
But your peers, you know, had Dr. Rowland.
I mean, to get that blurb that you got.
Walker Percy was my favorite living author when he was alive.
You know, that's heavy stuff.
That's more than just fashionable.
Writing, I guess, is what I'm trying to say.
Well, but I mean, no, I just think trying to be realistic, you know, being a writer just simply doesn't promise you anything.
And so I just try to be realistic about the fact that if I write a book that finds an audience this time, well, maybe I'll come close or do it all.
But there's just no promise down the line that I'll keep on being able to do that.
I like looking at the world that way.
I like it.
there is that contingency in the world.
A number of the people who have written about you think of me that you have this parapatetic sense of place, and I've seen some instances where you've disputed that.
Could you address yourself?
Well, I just think that Americans move.
Americans are always movies, and they make sure how this country was settled.
If people landed in one place and didn't like it, or if it didn't like them, and they got up and they went someplace else, and if that didn't work, they went someplace else.
People coming to a new place and trying to be accommodated is utterly American, but it's also the source of a lot of drama.
You know how you move into a new neighborhood, move to a new town, and what kind of things you have to learn, what about the place you bucks you.
It's the source of the drama of anybody's life.
That's why this book is about selling houses and buying houses, because it's in the ultimate American hometown drama.
So I think, I mean, I have moved around a lot, but I don't think that there's anything particularly interesting about that or very unusual.
Yeah, but you haven't staked out for yourself a... No, that's right.
Well, that's because somebody already staked out the Oxford talk before me.
I realized that I didn't know anything about Mississippi that I hadn't read in a book.
The whole of... If you drive around Mississippi right now, particularly the parts I like, the Delta and North Mississippi,
What you'll find is Faulkner everywhere, because he got it so right, and to a certain extent, Mississippians who've all read Faulkner by and large, particularly white people, they're living out a kind of a Faulkner life.
Likewise with you, Dora.
Who did she work for?
Yeah, regardless.
So anyway, I had nothing to write about the South, and so I had, and Walker had done everything, anything I might have wanted to write about the South, given my age, Walker had already done, and I wouldn't have been able to write what Faulkner did, but I knew the South much more in the eyes that Walker knew the South, the suburban South, and I knew that pretty well, and he'd already, unfortunately, circled the square there, so I was kind of made to go out of Mississippi and look at the rest
But you don't really feel the need of a specific place to energize your work.
No.
You can basically be where you are
Yeah, and one of the news will kick in and do Paris, Milan, West Roxbury, Missoula, New Jersey, Connecticut.
New Jersey, Connecticut, sure.
Well, you're a dream for me, you know, because I have newspapers in Connecticut.
I've got New London.
I've got two papers in New Jersey.
Yeah.
Every place that you've been, you know, I have people.
Well, I try.
You know, they always seem wonderful for me, really.
That's what's good for me.
But I always didn't like the idea of regional writing.
in the sense that... It's so American, though, excuse me for interrupting, though.
To be a regional writer.
Yeah, I mean, it is, and he's certainly, the Americans seem to be more regional than him.
I think it's less the case now, because in the time that I've been a writer, I notice when I go to Montana, where I've been part of the year, A, there are a lot of Southerners out there who've lived, who've lived through the second generation of it, and I notice the language.
The language that people speak, partly because of radio and TV, partly because of superpowers, the language, people speak the same language, the same locutions, the same metaphors.
So I find that, if anything, a wish to address the whole country rather than to address religion is a promising and fruitful, even helpful thing to do.
I don't want to talk about the country as though I were at its exponent, but...
There's something to hold it together.
And literature itself won't do it, but one of the consequences of multiculturalism is that you have, you know, fanatical pluralism.
And everybody else is adversaries.
The whole business about whether or not to speak English or not, also, they'll pull this country limb from limb.
And I would rather be in the guard of people who want to try to hold it together as a writer.
I believe people have to speak English.
I assure you I'll use that quote.
I speak three languages.
I grew up learning languages.
What are the other two?
I believe anybody who comes to this country who speaks Spanish, who speaks French, who speaks Portuguese, should
Find ways to keep their native language alive, but you need to speak English.
It is the American language.
I'm sorry.
I'm a liberal.
I hate to use publishing words like breakthrough books, but would you consider that a book that brought you from one level of recognition?
I guess it did, but I'm like you, I don't like that notion of a breakthrough book because I wrote it just like I wrote the other two, which was to say totally flat out and get my very best at it.
And moreover though, you know, when it came out, when the sports writer came out, it didn't get great reviews.
It got a very sort of dismissive review in the New York Sunday Times.
But I'll bet I know why, because it was a paperback original.
Well, it got a big review, though.
It was Alice Hoffman.
She just said, you know, this book isn't really very good.
Isn't that interesting?
I didn't realize she reviewed it.
Yeah.
She's an interesting woman.
I've never met her.
I hope never.
I didn't read her last week's second time.
She's kind of set on a track, I think.
Well, I think she was writing books by her own lights when she met her.
She was, in other words, like a lot of American writers.
And suddenly something happened to her readership, and it just exploded.
And I don't think she's writing books any differently.
I'm sure she's going along writing the most important books she knows how to write.
But her readership just went... Off the scale.
Yeah, which is great, you know.
I wish she had been a little more generous with me because I was doing nothing but what she was doing.
But anyway, it didn't feel like a breakthrough book at the time.
It did pretty well.
I think it's all 60,000, 70,000, which is... Ten years.
Okay, did it take time to hit that?
See, that's...
They can say 60,000 now, can't they?
90.
But it certainly does have a cachet, though.
Everybody knows the sports story.
They've read a lot.
It gets taught in colleges.
People come up to me sometimes and say, you know, I read your book, Going Through a Divorce, or I read your book, Going Through a Bad Town in My Life, Women and Men Together.
And for some reason or another, it kind of caught a little bit of the country's attention.
Going back to what you said earlier, you heard Frank's voice, and it was there, and it was there, and he wouldn't let go.
He must be pretty special to you then, I mean.
He is.
You know, and the Robert Angstrom question is kind of pertinent because, you know, he is perceived as the alter ego or the extension of Updike.
And I suppose there are those who are wondering if this might not be the case with you.
I wouldn't say so because I write about other people who are very different from Frank.
who I would think, if I only wrote about them, one would also say maybe they're my alter ego.
Maybe it's true that writers, if they are aspirant, have a lot of alter egos, because I do think that characters that you write do participate in your own character to some extent.
But I wouldn't say Frank was my alter ego.
No, he does contain a part of me, but all those guys I've written about in Montana, they contain another part of me, and the women out there.
Also, the other thing is, of course, I don't think of Frank as being the only person in the book.
Those kids in the book are hugely important to me.
There's a line from Graham Greene.
He said, to be a writer, you have to be able to be a lot of different people.
I think that's just something I always thought I could do.
How important is the story to you?
Very important.
I don't think I, I couldn't write books if they knew the story, you know, in the sense that I wasn't.
I mean, well, I thought you were, we all needed to get, because it did have this nice view of the garden.
This is just, you don't worry about it.
No, it's my, room service is my idea of heaven.
It's nice, isn't it?
Yes, it is.
I used to stay at the Chateau Marmont, you know.
Is that right?
And I always stay in the Chateau Marmont, and boy, to have a,
to have a tuna melt in the Chateau Marmont at about 11 o'clock at night, overlooking the lights of L.A.
is, you know, that's as good as it gets, as far as I'm concerned.
It's not as good as it gets in L.A.
You know, this is basically, by the way, a club sandwich with grilled chicken.
That's kind of what I thought when we were looking at it.
Does it have any bacon in there?
Yeah, it has bacon in there.
That's good.
Stuff, so there you go.
Let's go back to it.
Plus, the tea has clove in it.
My gosh, you just don't eat simple here, do you?
This has got an equal rating, you know, now with the Ritz, in terms of those who do the ratings.
Well, let me say, because I wish you would print this.
I was kicked out of the Ritz, where I was a guest, likewise to Copley, where I was a guest, for wearing my best blue jeans in the bar.
Never again, I said.
Made a big stink in the Ritz bar by her.
Said the F word a few times quite loudly.
That happens.
That's why I stay in the Four Seasons.
But it's a beautiful hotel.
I mean, you're not, you haven't gone down in class.
Do you have any plans for a prank?
I mean, no.
No.
Frank's on.
Frank was, when I first dispensed with him, he's gone back in the closet.
Which doesn't mean he's going to come back as a gay man.
Mm-hmm.
I don't have any plans for him, no.
That's not to say that he might not come back in some future... He could, he could, but not in any way that I know.
Well, then, did your dealings with him in this instance satisfy?
But my dealings with him in the last time satisfied.
Yeah, but you said his voice was still there, you could still hear him.
He came back five years later, so I extinguished his... I mean, I had a great deal of affection for the process of writing about him when I would read some paragraphs that I wrote
about him at the end of the book, I thought, gee, I'm glad to have written those paragraphs.
I'm glad those are there.
So he lived in that peculiar way.
But this book is still so fresh in my mind, and pretty much I'm right up against it.
I couldn't imagine looking around it and seeing down the road anything else.
Do you think of your body of work as a body of work, as a corpus, that that should really be?
Well, I feel like if I went ahead and do it
and did what I've been doing, that it might achieve that.
I mean, I've got sort of separate parts of a body of work.
I've got a part of a body of work that takes place in Montana, part of a body of work that takes place in the Northeast, a beginning, a little smaller body of work that takes place in Paris.
I don't think it'll ever, you know, it won't ever be cohesive in the sense of Yacht-Nippertafa.
But again, using Mr. Updack as an example,
He's written about it.
He writes all over the map.
He writes about everything.
But I, you know, frankly, conferring on somebody's work the idea of a corpus, that's for somebody who teaches at Amherst to do, you know.
I can't do that about my own work.
I just think of it as ongoing.
Well, I did an interview with Nadine Gordon McGill, and she was giving me a child's early in Norton lectures.
She made an interesting observation.
she's described, and she's got tons of books, you know, she compares it to a statue in a room, and walking in, and every book is looking at the statue from a different angle, the same piece of sculpture, but she's looking at it, and every book, even though she doesn't intend it to be that, she seems to feel that she's writing basically the same
So she has a theme, she thinks.
She thinks she has a... I guess, that's right.
You can get from that as much as I can, but it is an interesting observation on how she perceives her own work.
She's a woman I know quite well.
She's a woman who does not make offhand remarks.
If she said that, by God, that's what she meant.
Well, I quoted it.
I mean, it wasn't one of those little toss-off amounts that she made a regret.
No, no, no, it was considered.
Oh, yeah.
And she was very pleased that I had the tape recorded because she wanted to be sure that I got the quotations.
She's not one of them.
The quotation's precisely correct.
A certain pipe on this.
That's right.
Which is fine.
She ought to be proud of her work.
It's remarkable.
Of course, winning the Nobel Prize doesn't...
with an enormous amount of... I was talking to Pat Conway this week.
I don't know how... You and he are two... Nice man.
Wonderful, Pat.
I was just in New York with a Wednesday.
And nine years for this book.
And he says, you know what it's like?
He says, I never expected Prince of Tides to become Prince of Tides.
No, sure you didn't.
You know, he says, all of a sudden, they give me how many millions of dollars?
He said, I never need this kind of... Basically, he says, but all of a sudden, I have to write in my mind a million-dollar book.
He really did feel that he was carrying this baggage.
Do you feel the added weight of baggage each time out that you have to at least equalize and pass them?
What I feel is that I would like to broaden my readership.
And if my books are not broadening their readership, then I'm going nowhere.
And that's all.
That's all I feel.
Because as to the perks of being a writer, you know, people thinking that you're a good guy and reading your work and, you know, getting this and getting that, I don't need anything.
All I want to do is get people to read my work, and that's all.
I mean, I would feel like I was doing good.
In fact, I get more people to read books.
Mine.
It's an interesting concept to explore.
It's not enough for you to write and to know the work is good.
No, it's not.
It has to fund the readership.
That's not true if I was 25 years old.
That fueled me when I was 25 years old.
But 26 years later, I have to...
I have to do what writers have to do, which is to say, write and be read.
Does that validate the work for you, in a way?
It makes it seem worthwhile.
It makes it seem useful.
I want to write books that are useful for people.
I read, and please don't misunderstand me, it's just from the stories that I read, but you seem to take, when a reviewer can be a jerk, I guess, sir.
be hurtful or not understand, it upsets you.
You can't ignore yourself from what I've seen.
Nope.
I'm trying to put this down.
I have things, Jim.
Because if you review my books badly, you probably made an enemy out of me.
So don't come around and want to be my pal after you've reviewed my books badly because you will not find a friend.
Because what you've done, basically, if you review my books badly,
As you've said to readers who haven't read my book, don't read this guy's book.
Well, that's a formula.
Do you equate badly with negatively?
Yes.
I should say I make one exception there.
People who are regular book reviewers, people who have a track record, whose tastes are known, whose prelections are
available.
I make some exceptions, too.
But when colleagues review your book and drive people away from it, I take no prison in that.
And I agree.
As one who's been writing professionally about books, I would never publish a review.
For instance, I was a book review editor for any number of years.
To his credit, he just said, Nick, you get him.
You don't worry about them.
And see, there is a, and that's because Pat knows what only a guy like Pat can know, only a guy who's had the life that Pat's had to know.
Readers mean everything.
A bad review in Time Magazine is not going to drive a significant number of Pat Conroy faithful away from this book.
And so he thinks to himself, who I'm writing for is going to read this book.
There they are.
That's the connection.
And no amount of bad reviews.
Now, that's true for people with smaller readerships, you know.
Probably that's true for me.
I mean, but I do cut people slack who are professional reviewers.
I do believe that I can write a book that somebody wouldn't like.
I don't think that's crazy.
But, you know, what can I say?
Piss on my book?
You made an enemy.
There you are.
I'm amused also, in a nice way, in a very pleasant, agreeable way.
You make it very clear that you were not born to be a writer, that you studied hotel management, I guess, and you did a semester at law school.
This isn't something that has obsessed you
from your earliest recollections, and that is pretty interesting.
I mean, you can't say that you were born to be a writer.
Made myself a writer.
Yeah, but that's not possible with everybody, is it?
I mean, I for one don't believe that anybody can be a writer.
Well, I don't know if that's true.
More people than are writers could be writers if they wanted to, you know, perform those practices, dedicate yourself to your own responses to things, and
work hard to the exclusion of all else.
But no, probably everybody couldn't be a writer.
My wife, who's the smartest person I know, probably wouldn't want to write novels, probably couldn't write novels.
Which she says herself, and she could probably write a better one than she thinks.
But no.
For me, it was just a matter of
coming, getting kind of beefed in a very early part of my life, not being able to do anything very well to my satisfaction, starting off wanting to write stories because I hadn't already proved to myself I couldn't do it.
Also, I was led to it by having, by reading having meant so much to me.
I thought maybe I could do for a reader what books had done for me, which is to lift me up.
Any authors in particular?
Well, you know, the regular ones.
I mean, Eudora and Faulkner and Flannery O'Connor and a lot of Southerners, you know, Sherwood Anderson and Isaac Babo and Scott Fitzgerald.
What's your next interview?
Well, we'll just be cool.
It's only got ten minutes.
Hello.
Hi, honey.
Okay, we're just about finishing our lunch.
If we were about eight minutes, would that be okay?
All right.
No.
We'll just come down when we're finished.
Okay.
Thank you.
And does she want to come up here?
Because it's nice and quiet up here.
But unless, I mean, if there's a quiet place, that's what I would like.
It doesn't have to be here.
You just think about it when I come downstairs.
Okay.
Bye.
Sorry.
Yeah, I got plenty of stuff to write.
I wish you had a nice lunch out of this thing.
I love this thing.
I wanted a nice, quiet place where we could just... Just a nice... We've got to sign a couple of books, too.
Mm-hmm.
So many things that... I'm not going to ask you questions that other people have asked you.
I find that you are very comfortable writing, creating male characters or...
But I feel uncomfortable, I think maybe my best characters are women.
I don't have to narrate books necessarily, but... You're not afraid to try and make a woman... Notion that women, this rabid notion that men can't know anything about women.
I mean, women are on men's minds a lot.
Men can know quite a lot about women.
They don't necessarily know everything at all, and their word isn't the last word, but... I take great pleasure writing about women because I try to give them wonderful lines to say.
And I think if I'm giving characters wonderful lines, that I'm making them controllers of their own fate.
If they're speaking grammatically into the world, talking about what's important, I don't know what else you can do.
with characters besides martyring them to give them a stature in a book.
So I feel like I deal with women quite well.
I've actually never had anybody convince me that I wrote about women badly.
In fact, I've had a lot of women say, I don't know why people say you write about women less well than you write about men.
I don't think so.
So I feel corroborated about writing about women.
And let me just go back because you say you write
what's most important to you is to get that readership.
Do you have a sense of who the readership is?
And then as a corollary to that, do you write for that readership?
Do you have this readership in mind when you write?
Who do I think I write for?
Not college professors.
Not book reviewers.
But maybe somebody who was 20 years old who was serious and
who needed, in some ways, to have a life changed by a piece of work.
In other words, I write for somebody who was like I was when literature began to make a big difference to my life.
I mean, I could have read Racine, I could have read Fitzgerald, I could have read Flaubert, I could have read George Eliot at that age.
You know, I don't mean I write for kids.
I don't.
I write for adults.
Writing for that person who needs a book
you know, for whom a book could make a difference.
And you perceive this as your readership as well.
You write for that reader.
Yeah.
You also perceive that that is who your reader is.
Yeah, it is.
Although I've had people come in to book signings who said that they read my books.
I remember Toby Wolfe and I were someplace, and some guy said, you know, I read your books on my tractor when I have lunch.
I'm on the phone.
I thought to myself, ah, Jonathan, you're going to eat your heart out.
because he had not long before said that nobody read my work because it wasn't any good.
That's what he actually said.
Jesus.
He said, this guy shouldn't even be writing books.
Nobody reads him anyway.
What an asshole.
Wow.
I said it.
He will not be allowed into heaven.
I have to say, you're the first writer I've seen, I've met, and I've met hundreds of them, literally, who actually can give a specific date for when he became a writer.
I saw that in January, 65, something like that.
Isn't that great?
I became a writer on such and such a date.
Yeah.
My mother said to me, what are you going to do with yourself?
I said, I think I'm going to be a writer.
I never looked back.
And then once you committed yourself to it, would you say you're obsessive?
No.
Well, I have been with this book.
I would have said I was in a healthy way, very determined up to now.
I think this book
required a certain obsessiveness on my part.
And then where you have also been described by numerous writers as writing often about down-and-out drifters, and then some of these same writers also quote you as saying you're an optimist.
Maybe you could give me a brief quote on that.
Well, I'll just quote you Sartre, that to write about the darkest possible things is itself an act of optimism, because it proves they can be thought about.
Hmm.
I mean,
And that's when I think of an optimist, I think that a story is always optimistic.
Because I give you a story and I say, here's something you will like or you can use or make something of, which necessarily means you have a future, which necessarily means that it posits the possibility of something better.
So I don't know.
It just seems to me that, you know,
necessarily an optimistic gesture.
Great.
And then, why don't we make this the last one so we don't keep your other... Carol waiting too long.
Do you make a distinction between the fictive world and the real world?
And if you do, which one is the more truthful world?
The real world.
Is more truthful.
Really?
Absolutely.
I didn't expect to say that.
Throw me back on that.
Okay.
Great.
Can you just explain briefly on that?
Well,
For me, fiction is something that one does to bring you back into the real world with heightened acuity, a greater sense of where pleasure lies, a greater sense of what's important.
And you go to fiction basically for instruction of a kind, you know, in the broadest sense, in the Aristotelian sense of instruction, for instruction about the real world.
in that very setup, the fictive world is subordinate to the real world.
That's great.
Want to quit on that?
Yeah.
Will you sign a couple books for me?